---
title: "Assessing the value of managing diabetic kidney disease from a US healthcare perspective"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /conferences/2024-06-23-DKD-value-004
venue: "American Diabetes Association; 84th Scientific Sessions"
date: 2024-06-25
location: "Orlando, Florida, United States"
---

This study estimates the economic value of attenuating the rate of decline of eGFR to limit DKD progression. 

---

Abstract: We used published estimates of T2D and CKD prevalence, stratified by CKD stage, to develop a deterministic model of DKD. Patient characteristics and mean annual eGFR decline was aligned to the DECLARE-TIMI 58 trial placebo arm. Diabetes-specific and all-cause mortality were captured using UKPDS82 risk equations. The value of achieving sustained attenuation of eGFR decline was quantified in terms of costs and QALYs. The findings of our per-patient and population-level analyses emphasise that both patients and the healthcare system benefit from attenuating DKD progression at the earliest opportunity.

Lay abstract: This study looked at the economic benefits of slowing down the progression of diabetic kidney disease (DKD) by reducing the decline of kidney function (measured by eGFR) in people with type 2 diabetes (T2D). Managing DKD to slow down the loss of kidney function has clear economic and health benefits, both for individual patients and the healthcare system as a whole. The greatest benefits are shown to come from the earliest intervention.

[Abstract here](https://doi.org/10.2337/db24-1041-P)

Recommended citation: McEwan, P., Padgett, T., Evans, M. (2024) Assessing the value of managing diabetic kidney disease from a US healthcare perspective. Diabetes 14 June 2024; 73 (Supplement_1): 1041–P. https://doi.org/10.2337/db24-1041-P